This repository contains R scripts used to prepare figures for our manuscript, “Partially exhausted CD8 T cells are associated with clinical response to teplizumab in new-onset type 1 diabetes”, currently under revision for publication. 

In this manuscript, we used integrated systems biology and flow cytometry approaches with clinical trial samples to conduct an unbiased investigation of genes associated with C-peptide stabilization in T1D subjects treated with the anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody teplizumab. We first identified a population of CD8 T cells with an exhausted-like phenotype that accumulated in teplizumab-treated subjects. Levels of these cells in individual subjects were proportional to the response to treatment, and kinetics of therapy. We next, functionally defined these CD8 T cells as partially exhausted cells, capable of further enhancement of inhibitory receptors and down-modulation of effector and cell cycle genes upon inhibitory receptor ligation. Our findings suggest that pathway(s) regulating T cell exhaustion may play a role in successful immune interventions for T1D. 

We believe this is the first demonstration of a connection between T cell exhaustion and therapeutic efficacy of a biologic agents for autoimmune disease. In cancer immunotherapy, agents that reverse T cell exhaustion trigger objective anti-tumor responses, and sometimes induce autoimmune disorders as a side effect. Our present study illustrates the converse situation in therapy for an autoimmune disease, namely that exhaustion pathway(s) are increased during patient response to a biologic agent in T1D. Our studies provide evidence that pathway(s) clinically important and undesirable for tumor immunology are also potentially important but desirable for response to a biologic agent in T1D. Our results, together with the proven clinical tractability of this pathway in humans, suggest that enhancing CD8 T cell exhaustion may provide new therapeutic possibilities for T1D and other autoimmune diseases.

This manuscript describes original work and is not under consideration by any other journal. Gene expression data have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository under accession number, GSE85573. 

